Update Action Server docs with slot validation actions (#604)
RasaHQ/rasa-sdk: docs/docs/validation-action.mdx

---
id: validation-action

> sidebar_label: ValidationAction Class

Author: There's only one final point to address: `decide how much of the slot validation action rasa docs should move to the action server docs` - here my suggestion is to actually label this page `Slot Validation Actions`, then I can complete it with another section on the implementation of `FormValidationAction` and add a link to rasa docs to learn more about how to use these actions in a bot project. WDYT? @melindaloubser1

Reviewer: That sounds like a good split! Anything sdk-implementation level belongs in action server docs  👍

Author: Done - ready for review now 😁

---
id: validation-action
sidebar_label: Slot Validation Actions
title: Slot Validation Actions
abstract: Learn how `ValidationAction` class is implemented in the Rasa SDK.
---

There are two helper classes in Rasa SDK with the role of executing custom slot extraction and validation:
- `ValidationAction`: the base class for custom actions extracting and validating slots that can be set or updated
outside of a form context.
- `FormValidationAction`: the base class for custom actions extracting and validating slots that are set only within
the context of a form.

In order to implement custom slot extraction and validation logic, you have the option of subclassing either

> `ValidationAction` or `FormValidationAction` class, depending on the context in which you prefer to set or update slots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ValidationAction` or `FormValidationAction` class, depending on the context in which you want to set or update slots.
```

## `ValidationAction` class

You can extend the `ValidationAction` class in the Rasa SDK to define custom extraction and / or validation of slots that
can be set or updated outside of a form context.

:::note
`ValidationAction` is intended for extracting slots **outside** the context of a form.

> It will ignore extraction and validation methods for any slots that have a form specified under the slot mapping's `conditions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will ignore extraction and validation methods for any slots that have a form specified under the [slot mapping's `conditions`](https://rasa.com/docs/rasa/next/domain#mapping-conditions).
```

It will not run these methods when the specified form is active nor when no form is active.

> Please extend the [`FormValidationAction`](./validation-action.mdx#formvalidationaction-class) class for applying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please extend the [`FormValidationAction`](./validation-action.mdx#formvalidationaction-class) class to apply
```

custom slot mappings only within the context of a form.
:::

### How to subclass `ValidationAction`

> Firstly, you must add the name of this action to the domain `actions` list: `action_validate_slot_mappings`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, you must add the name of this action, `action_validate_slot_mappings` to the domain `actions` list.
```

Note that you do not need to implement the `name` method in the custom action extending `ValidationAction`, since this

> is already implemented. If you override the `name` method, the custom validation action will not run because the

Reviewer: One q for later: What happens if they subclass `ValidationAction` twice, so that two actions called `action_validate_slot_mappings` get registered?

Author: 🤯 I haven't tested that so not sure if only one will run or there will be an error? I assumed all validate/extract slot methods will go into one subclass, probably best to document this assumption.

automatically if present in the `actions` section of the domain.

#### Validation of Slots with Predefined Mappings

To validate slots with a predefined mapping, you must write functions named `validate_<slot_name>`.

In the following example, the value for slot `location` is capitalized only if the extracted value is of type string:

```python
from typing import Text, Any, Dict

from rasa_sdk import Tracker, ValidationAction
from rasa_sdk.executor import CollectingDispatcher
from rasa_sdk.types import DomainDict

class ValidatePredefinedSlots(ValidationAction):
    def validate_location(
        self,
        slot_value: Any,
        dispatcher: CollectingDispatcher,
        tracker: Tracker,
        domain: DomainDict,
    ) -> Dict[Text, Any]:
        """Validate location value."""
        if isinstance(slot_value, str):
            # validation succeeded, capitalize the value of the "location" slot
            return {"location": slot_value.capitalize()}
        else:
            # validation failed, set this slot to None
            return {"location": None}
```

#### Extraction of Custom Slot Mappings

> In order to define custom extraction code, you must write an `extract_<slot_name>` method for every slot with a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define custom extraction code, write an `extract_<slot_name>` method for every slot with a
```

##### **Returns**

  A list of `rasa_sdk.events.SlotSet` instances. See the [documentation for SlotSet events](sdk-events.mdx#slotset).

##### ValidationAction.get_validation_events

```python
async ValidationAction.get_validation_events(dispatcher, tracker, domain)
```

The `get_validation_events` method will gather the list of slot names to validate via `required_slots` method call.
Then it will get a mapping of slots which were recently set and their values via `tracker.slots_to_validate` call.
Looping through this mapping of recently extracted slots, it will check if the slot is in `required_slots` then run the
`validate_<slot name>` method if available for that slot.

###### **Returns**

  A list of `rasa_sdk.events.SlotSet` instances. See the [documentation for SlotSet events](sdk-events.mdx#slotset).

## `FormValidationAction` class

A `FormValidationAction` custom action will only run if the form it specifies in its name is activated.
If certain custom slot mappings should only be extracted and / or validated within the context of a form,
the custom action should inherit from `FormValidationAction` rather than from `ValidationAction`.

> Since `FormValidationAction` runs on every user turn only as long as the form is active, it is not required to use
> mapping conditions for custom slot mappings defined in a custom action extending `FormValidationAction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since  a custom action extending `FormValidationAction` runs on every user turn only as long as the form is active, it is not required to use
mapping conditions in this case.
```

---
id: validation-action
sidebar_label: Slot Validation Actions
title: Slot Validation Actions
abstract: Learn how `ValidationAction` class is implemented in the Rasa SDK.
---

There are two helper classes in Rasa SDK with the role of executing custom slot extraction and validation:
- `ValidationAction`: the base class for custom actions specialized on custom extraction and / or validation
of slots that can be set or updated outside of a form context.
- `FormValidationAction`: the base class for custom actions extracting and validating slots that are set only within
the context of a form.

> ## `ValidationAction` class implementation

Reviewer: I would suggest organizing this as:
```
Intro including ## How to subclass slot validation actions content
ValidationAction`
     Usage
     Implementation
FormValidationAction
      Usage
      Implementation
   ```
   
   Users will want usage before implementation details, and the classes group naturally to themselves

can be set or updated outside of a form context.

:::note
`ValidationAction` is intended for extracting slots **outside** the context of a form.
It will ignore extraction and validation methods for any slots that have a form specified under the
[slot mapping's `conditions`](https://rasa.com/docs/rasa/next/domain#mapping-conditions).
It will not run these methods when the specified form is active nor when no form is active.
Please extend the [`FormValidationAction`](./validation-action.mdx#formvalidationaction-class) class to apply
custom slot mappings only within the context of a form.
:::

### How to subclass `ValidationAction`

Firstly, you must add the name of this action, `action_validate_slot_mappings`, to the domain `actions` list.
Note that you do not need to implement the `name` method in the custom action extending `ValidationAction`, since this
is already implemented. If you override the `name` method, the custom validation action will not run because the
original name is hardcoded in the call that the default action `action_extract_slots` makes to the action server.

> It is recommended to create only one subclass of `ValidationAction` which should contain all extraction and validation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should create only one subclass of `ValidationAction` which should contain all extraction and validation
```

Have you checked what happens if you create two? Since there's no point in creating two, this is stronger than a recommendation

Author: No, helping out on a different bugfix, not sure I'll be able to test this today.

`required_slots`. `domain_slots` is returned by the `domain_slots` method, which only takes
`Domain` as an argument.

#### FormValidationAction.next_requested_slot

The method `next_requested_slot` will set the value of `REQUESTED_SLOT` to the next unset slot only if the
`required_slots` method was overriden by the custom action subclassing `FormValidationAction`.

If users didn't override `required_slots` then we'll let the `FormAction` within Rasa Open
Source request the next slot, and the method will return `None`.

The parameters the method requires are:
- [dispatcher](sdk-dispatcher.mdx)
- [tracker](sdk-tracker.mdx)
- the bot's domain

#### FormValidationAction.run

The original implementation of the `ValidationAction.run` method is extended to add a call to the `next_requested_slot`
method. The output of the `next_requested_slot` method call (if not `None`) is added to the list of events that `run`
method returns.

## How to subclass slot validation actions

To learn more about how to subclass `ValidationAction` and `FormValidationAction` classes in your custom actions, please

> visit [Slot Validation Actions](https://rasa.com/docs/rasa/next/slot-validation-actions) in the Rasa Open Source docs.

Reviewer: I think we had slightly different ideas of what the "sdk implementation" boundary was -  I was actually thinking almost everything currently under https://rasa.com/docs/rasa/next/slot-validation-actions goes here, because it is direct documentation on how to use rasa-sdk.

Then the  slot-validation-actions page on OSS would describe, action-server agnostically: 
* What is expected of the actions that are called automatically (`action_validate_<form_name>` and `action_validate_slot_mappings`)
* What is expected of custom actions referred to by slot mappings directly

So it would end up a fairly short page, almost all the details would move here. 

To be fair, all the actions docs pages have things in them that belong elsewhere. E.g. the default actions page correctly describes only the functionality and events returned by default actions, but then has a random sdk-specific overwriting example.

Reviewer: Probably worth a separate issue for cleaning up the other action-server-specific docs by putting them in the  SDK docs

Author: > mostly delete the overlapping content and add a link instead

Regarding the link, that won't exist before the release I suspect - once this is merged and I update the rasa docs, how do I solve the link issue? Would the `main/unreleased` link exist and use that instead?

Reviewer: mm I remember this being a problem before too. In which order will the release happen? OSS then SDK or other way around?

Author: It's the SDK first.

Reviewer: Then it'll be fine, the link will exist when OSS is released.

Author: But will I be able to merge the PR with these changes to rasa `main`? usually `Test Docs` CI step fails if link doesn't exist.

Reviewer: I guess though that's a problem for  getting the PR merged to release branch

Reviewer: Ahaha ja same thought at same time.

Reviewer: Is there an ignore flag for certain links?

Author: I don't know actually, maybe @m-vdb knows: we want to update Rasa docs with a link from SDK that won't exist before the release, is there a way to ignore this link during the CI checks?

Reviewer: There is this: https://github.com/RasaHQ/rasa/blob/c2b5176f221c35be628cd0099ce486c4ce187108/docs/package.json#L113-L118
maybe best to point to main/unreleased though, that seems like a long term thing

Reviewer 2: can you use the `/next/` URL here and clean it up post release instead of disabling the check?

Author: Yup, that sounds the best solution.
